# Keynote speakers

## Thomas Gruber (Regionales RechenZentrum Erlangen - RRZE)

<img src="" />

Title: Unleash the control freak in yourself for fun and profit - and for science!

### Abstract

Performance measurements and benchmarks are comparable to
experiments in laboratories where as much external influences as
possible have to be controlled and documented. In the recent years,
more and more conferences and journals request artifact descriptions
along with the paper to improve the reproducibility of research.
With the rising complexity of nowadays systems, the amount of
influences increases dramatically and the various settings are often
unknown to the researchers. While information like operating system,
software versions and CPU/GPU types are often documented in papers,
information like system temperatures, MPI runtime settings and
device power limits are not mentioned despite their influence on
performance.

MachineState provides a systematic approach to gather as many
performance influencing factors as known to the performance
engineering community. It records hardware details as well as
information about the runtime environment and the application in a
single shareable JSON file. It is a valuable source of information
when recapping previously done measurement runs. MachineState can
compare the current state with a previously created file to guide
the configuration of a system and the runtime environment for
reproducibility research. The feature can also be used to spot
differences when comparing two similar systems showing divergent
runtime behavior. But most importantly, it provides a simple-to-use
method for all researchers to provide good artifact description for
the reproducibility and therefore underlines the quality of their
research. 

### Short bio

## Dr Katy Clough (STFC Ernest Rutherford Research Fellow)

<img src="https://www.qmul.ac.uk/maths/media/maths/people/staff-photos/Teddy_Hall_by_John_Cairns_3.10.18-104.JPG" />

Title: t.b.c.
Slot: t.b.c.

### Abstract

t.b.c.

### Short bio

Katy's research focuses on using numerical solutions to understand the consequences of Einstein's theory of general relativity, in particular concerning black hole environments and inhomogeneities in the early universe. She is a member of the Geometry, Analysis and Gravitation group in the School of Mathematical Sciences.

## Prof Dr Philipp Neumann

<img src="https://www.desy.de/sites2009/site_www-desy/content/e410/e123090/e340114/Philipp-Neumann-DESY-Leitender-Wissenschaftler-header_ger.jpg" />

Title: t.b.c.
Slot: t.b.c.

### Abstract

t.b.c.

### Short bio

Philipp Neumann's research focuses on high performance computing for molecular dynamics simulations, multiscale simulations in fluid dynamics and machine learning. At DESY, Neumann is the first lead scientist for the area of computer science. As head of DESY IT, Neumann takes over the coordination of Helmholtz Federated IT Services HIFIS (the federated IT infrastructure and Helmholtz platform for supporting research work within the Helmholtz Association).
